# Introduction to dbdreader

The python package dbdreader is a package that can be used to read
binary data files that are generated by Teledyne WebbResearch Slocum
gliders see http://www.webbresearch.com.

The Slocum gliders produce binary data files that contain engineering
data or science data. Engineering data are stored in sbd or dbd files,
where sbd files contain a subset of the dbd files. Science data are
stored in tbd and ebd files. Also here the tbd files contain a subset
of the parameters in the ebd files.

The dbdreader package provides APIs for accessing a single binary file
or multiple binaries. The package lets you, for example,

- read the measured depth of a given dbd file,
- retrieve CTD data from multiple ebd files,
- retrieve heading, roll and pitch, interpolated on the time basis of
  depth

## Installing dbdreader

dbdreader is written for python3. Python2.7 is not
supported. Currently, python versions 3.10, 3.11, 3.12 and 3.13 are
supported.

The code is developed at github
(https://github.com/smerckel/dbdreader) from where you can get the
source code.

Alternatively, the latest dbdreader package is available from the
python package index (https://pypi.python.org), so that you can
install it using pip.


The dbdreader module contains a C extension. All versions up to 0.5.x
require a C-compiler to be available to build the package, either from
source or using pip. From version 0.6.0 onwards, a python only
fallback option is available. Installing the package, without a
C-compiler available on the system will issue a message regarding the
subject, but it will not fail. At run-time, the slower pure python
implementation will be used to read the binary files.

For linux and windows wheels are provided for x86_64 systems, which
would let pip install the package with a compiled C-extension by default. 

Furthermore, as of version 0.5.1, dbdreader is able
to uncompress lz4-compressed data files, which requires the lz4
library and header files. If system libraries are available, they will
be used. If not, for example on Windows, the library will be built
from the code shipped with dbdreader.


### Requirements for compiling C-extension

| OS      | Command                                    |
|---------|---------------------------------------------|
| Fedora  | `dnf install gcc lz4-libs lz4-devel`         |
| Ubuntu  | `apt-get install gcc liblz4-1 liblz4-dev`    |
| Windows | Microsoft C++ build tools                    |


### Installation using pip
Install using pip:

```
pip install dbdreader
```

will install dbdreader from a wheel, if possible. To enforce a local
compilation, use

```
pip install --no-binary dbdreader
```


## Dbdreader quickstart

The package comes with a number of examples. However, to give you a
flavour of how easy it is to read one or two variables, consider the
example code below.

```python
import dbdreader

dbd = dbdreader.DBD("unit204-2014-212-0-0.dbd")
t,d = dbd.get("m_depth")
```

This example opens a single file and the get() method returns a tuple
of two numpy arrays. The first is a time vector in seconds since 1970
and the second the value vector, of the glider depth in this case.

Multiple parameters can be requested in a single call.
```
depth, pitch = dbd.get("m_depth", "m_pitch")
```

In this call, both ```depth``` and ```pitch``` are tuples of two numpy
arrays, containing time and value vectors. Because the glider stores
the value of its parameters (sensors) only when they are updated, the
length of two different parameters are generally different. In this
example, the time vectors for depth and pitch will not be the same.

A convenience method ```dbd.get_sync``` is provided to create equally
long parameter vectors through interpolation. The example
```
timestamps, depth_values, pitch_values = dbd.get("m_depth", "m_pitch")
```
returns three numpy arrays, that are equally long. In this case
```timestamps``` and ```depth_values``` are identical to the variables ```t``` and ```d```,
respectively, from the first example. The variable ```pitch_values```
contains a numpy array where the pitch values are interpolated on to
the time vector of the first parameter, in this case m_depth.

Besides reading multiple parameters, multiple files can also be read
using the MultiDBD class. A list of filenames or a string using
wildcards can be used to select the files. For example,
```
dbd = dbdreader.MultiDBD("unit204-2014-212.*.[de]dbd")
t,d = dbd.get("m_depth")
```
would read m_depth for all dbd and ebd files that match the pattern
"unit204-2014-212.*.[de]dbd".

A list of all parameters available can be found through the attribute
```parameterNames```. For single file objects (DBD) the attribute is a
list of strings of all parameter names. For the multi file objects
(MultiDBD), this is a dictionary with keys "eng" and "sci" for
dbd/mbd/sbd and ebd/nbd/tbd files, respectively. For example:
```
dbd.parameterNames['eng']
```
returns all available parameters in the dbd files.


:::{note}
If possible dbdreader will use the C-extension to read the binary
files. As explained above, the pure python fallback option will be
used if the extension cannot be compiled for whatever reason or there
is no suitable wheel available. You can use the environment variable
DBDREADER_C_EXTENSION to use one or the other backend:

```
DBDREADER_C_EXTENSION=0 # uses pure python backend
DBDREADER_C_EXTENSION=1 # uses C-extension.
```

If ```DBDREADER_C_EXTENSION=1``` and the C-extension could not be
built, then an exception will be thrown.
:::

## Dbdreader cli commands

The dbdreader package also provides a command 'dbdrename'. This
utility allows data files to be renamed between the 8x3 filename
(for example 00030318.dbd) and
the longfilename (for example unit204-2015-5-0-318.dbd). Usually this is done by the dockserver
automatically when downloading files, but it can be convenient in some
cases to do this explicitly. It is unfortunate that the long name
convention results in filenames that do not sort properly
alphabetically. For example a sorted list of filenames would put
unit204-2015-5-0-318.dbd before unit204-2015-40-0-1.dbd. The problem is
vanishes if the last three fields of the long filename would have
leading zeros. The dbdrename utility does this by default, but can
also be used to rename the original formatted long filenames to
sortable long filenames. 

New from version 0.5.1 is the ability to decompress compressed data
files.

```text
usage: dbdrename [-h] [-s] [-n] [-c] [-C] [-x] [-X] [-d] [filenames ...]

Program to rename dbd files and friends from numeric format to long format, or vice versa, or convert the long format into a
sortable name or the original Webb Research long format, or decompress LZ4 compressed files.

positional arguments:
  filenames             Filename(s) to process

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -s                    Ensures long format filenames are sortable
  -n                    Keeps the original long format filenames (which do not sort correctly).
  -c, --convertToSortable
                        Converts files from original long format to a sortable long format
  -C, --convertToOriginal
                        Converts files from a sortable long format to the original long format
  -x, --decompress      Decompresses LZ4 comrpessed files.
  -X, --decompressAndRemoveCompressed
                        Decompresses LZ4 comrpessed files, and removes the compressed file
  -d, --doNotChangeNameFormat
                        Does not change the filename format. (Only  useful in combination with -x or -X)
```
